Kubernetes v1.36 Announcement Blog Post (#55151)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2026/kubernetes-v1-36-release/index.md

---  
layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes v1.36: RELEASE NAME'

> date: 2026-04-XXXX

Reviewer: Once this gets a proper date, I think the deploy preview would pick up and make it available on web view.

```suggestion
date: 2026-04-22T10:30:00-08:00
```

draft: true
evergreen: true
slug: kubernetes-v1-36-release
author: >
  [Kubernetes v1.36 Release Team](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/blob/master/releases/release-1.36/release-team.md)

>   release_announcement:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
release_announcement:
```

fix index in the frontmatter

  minor_version: “1.36”
---

> **Editors:** Chad M. Crowell,  Kirti Goyal, Sophia Ugochukwu, Swathi Rao, Utkarsh Umre

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Editors:** Chad M. Crowell, Kirti Goyal, Sophia Ugochukwu, Swathi Rao, Utkarsh Umre
```

Similar to previous releases, the release of Kubernetes v1.36 introduces new stable, beta, and alpha features. The consistent delivery of high-quality releases underscores the strength of our development cycle and the vibrant support from our community.

> This release consists of 71 enhancements. Of those enhancements, 18 have graduated to Stable, 26 are entering Beta, and 25 have graduated to Alpha.

Reviewer: The count is incorrect, the total should be 70
```suggestion
This release consists of 70 enhancements. Of those enhancements, 18 have graduated to Stable, 25 are entering Beta, and 25 have graduated to Alpha.
```

> There are also some [deprecations and removals](#deprecations-and-removals) in this release; make sure to read about those.

Reviewer: This link is broken, the link target needs to exactly match the wording used in the title.
```suggestion
There are also some [deprecations and removals](#deprecations-removals-and-community-updates) in this release; make sure to read about those.
```

## Release theme and logo

\<TODO RELEASE THEME AND LOGO\>

## Spotlight on key updates

Kubernetes v1.36 is packed with new features and improvements. Here are a few select updates the Release Team would like to highlight!

### Stable: Fine-grained API authorization

On behalf of Kubernetes SIG Auth and SIG Node, we are pleased to announce the
graduation of fine-grained `kubelet` API authorization to General Availability
(GA) in Kubernetes v1.36!

The `KubeletFineGrainedAuthz` feature gate was introduced as an opt-in alpha feature in Kubernetes v1.32, then graduated to beta (enabled by default) in v1.33. Now, the feature is generally available, and the feature gate is locked to enable. This feature enables more precise, least-privilege access control over the `kubelet`'s HTTPS API replacing the need to grant the overly broad nodes/proxy permission for common monitoring and observability use cases.

> ​​This work was done as a part of [KEP #2862](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2862) led by SIG Auth and SIG Node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
​​This work was done as a part of [KEP #2862](https://kep.k8s.io/2862) led by SIG Auth and SIG Node.
```

> ### Beta: Resource Health Status

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Beta: Resource health status
```

> Previously, Kubernetes lacked a native way to report the health of allocated devices, making it difficult to diagnose Pod crashes caused by hardware failures. Building on the initial Alpha release in v1.31 which focused on Device Plugins, Kubernetes v1.36 expands this feature to support Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA), introducing the `allocatedResourcesStatus` field to provide a unified health reporting mechanism for all specialized hardware.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously, Kubernetes lacked a native way to report the health of allocated devices, making it difficult to diagnose Pod crashes caused by hardware failures. Building on the initial alpha release in v1.31 which focused on Device Plugins, Kubernetes v1.36 expands this feature to support Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA), introducing the `allocatedResourcesStatus` field to provide a unified health reporting mechanism for all specialized hardware.
```

Now, users can use `kubectl describe pod` to determine if a container's crash loop is due to an `Unhealthy` or `Unknown` device status, regardless of whether the hardware was provisioned via traditional plugins or the newer DRA framework. This enhanced visibility allows administrators and automated controllers to quickly identify faulty hardware and streamline the recovery of high-performance workloads.

> This work was done as part of [KEP #4680](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4680) led by SIG Node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #4680](https://kep.k8s.io/4680) led by SIG Node.
```

> ### Alpha: Staleness mitigation for controllers

Reviewer 2: @chadmcrowell am I wrong or we had the WAS section here as alpha spotlight?

Author: yes there is supposed to be a "Alpha: Workload Aware Scheduling (WAS) features"

Previously, the Kubernetes scheduler and job controllers managed pods as independent units, often leading to fragmented scheduling or resource waste for complex, distributed workloads. Kubernetes v1.36 introduces a comprehensive suite of Workload Aware Scheduling (WAS) features in Alpha, natively integrating the Job controller with a new Workload API and a decoupled PodGroup API to treat related pods as a single logical entity.

> As of v1.35, the scheduler could perform Gang Scheduling by ensuring a minimum number of pods are ready before any are bound, while the new work in gang scheduling in v1.36 includes a new PodGroup scheduling cycle, which atomically evaluates the entire pod group.

Reviewer: The term "gang scheduling" appears twice in this paragraph with inconsistent casing. I think this should be simply "gang scheduling" based on the [documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/gang-scheduling/) which only uses caps for article title. Since it's a relatively new term in Kubebrnetes, it may be even worth adding a link to the doc.

```suggestion
As of v1.35, the scheduler could perform [gang scheduling](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/gang-scheduling/) by ensuring a minimum number of pods are ready before any are bound, while the new work in gang scheduling in v1.36 includes a new PodGroup scheduling cycle, which atomically evaluates the entire pod group.
```

> This work was done as part of [KEP #5647](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5647) led by SIG API Machinery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #5647](https://kep.k8s.io/5647) led by SIG API Machinery.
```

## Features graduating to Stable

This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now stable following the v1.36 release.

### Volume Group Snapshots

> After several cycles in beta, Volume Group Snapshots reach General Availability (GA) in Kubernetes v1.36. This feature allows you to take crash-consistent snapshots across multiple PersistentVolumeClaims simultaneously. By ensuring that data and logs across different volumes remain synchronized, this enhancement provides a robust solution for protecting complex, multi-volume workloads. With this release, the API version promotes to v1 and the CSIVolumeGroupSnapshot feature gate is now locked to enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After several cycles in beta, Volume Group Snapshots reach General Availability (GA) in Kubernetes v1.36. This feature allows you to take crash-consistent snapshots across multiple PersistentVolumeClaims simultaneously. By ensuring that data and logs across different volumes remain synchronized, this enhancement provides a robust solution for protecting complex, multi-volume workloads. With this release, the API version promotes to v1 and the `CSIVolumeGroupSnapshot` feature gate is now locked to enabled.
```

> This work was done as part of [KEP #3476](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3476) led by SIG Storage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #3476](https://kep.k8s.io/3476) led by SIG Storage.
```

### CSI driver opt-in for service account tokens via secrets field

> Security for storage integrations reaches a higher standard in Kubernetes v1.36 with the graduation of CSI Service Account Token Secret Redaction to Stable. This improvement eliminates a long-standing security risk where sensitive service account tokens, intended only for the storage driver, were inadvertently exposed within the Secret field of CSI volume objects, making them visible to unauthorized users with basic read access to the API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes v1.36, the feature to pass Container Storage Interface (CSI) service account tokens via the `secrets` field graduates to stable. This enhancement resolves a security issue where the kubelet passed sensitive tokens to CSI drivers within the `volume_context` field of volume requests. Because `volume_context` is not designed for sensitive data, CSI drivers could inadvertently log these tokens in cleartext.
```

> Now, Kubernetes automatically ensures that these short-lived tokens are handled through dedicated, secure channels rather than being bundled into persistent secrets. This change hardens the security posture of clusters by enforcing the principle of least privilege, preventing token leakage and ensuring that workload identities remain protected throughout the entire storage lifecycle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kubernetes now allows CSI drivers to opt in to receive these short-lived tokens through the dedicated `secrets` field. Driver authors can enable this behavior by updating the `CSIDriver` object. This approach prevents token leakage in driver logs and protects workload identities.
```

> This work was done as part of [KEP #5538](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5538) led by SIG Storage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #5538](https://kep.k8s.io/5538) led by SIG Storage.
```

> ### Mutable CSINode Allocatable Property

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Mutable CSINode allocatable property
```

> The management of node storage capacity becomes significantly more dynamic in Kubernetes v1.36 with the graduation of Mutable CSINode Allocatable to Stable. This update moves away from the historical limitation where the storage resource limits for a node, such as the maximum number of volumes a node can handle, were static and only set during the initial registration of the CSI driver.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes v1.36, the Mutable `CSINode` Allocatable feature graduates to stable. This enhancement resolves a limitation where node storage resource limits, such as the maximum number of volumes a node can attach, were static and set only during the initial registration of the Container Storage Interface (CSI) driver.
```

> Now, CSI drivers can update their volume limits and capacity information on the fly without requiring a restart of the driver or the kubelet. This flexibility is essential for modern cloud environments where node resources can change dynamically, ensuring that the Kubernetes scheduler always has an accurate view of storage availability and preventing pod scheduling failures caused by outdated volume limits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this update, the `kubelet` can dynamically update a node's volume limits and capacity information. The `kubelet` adjusts these limits based on periodic checks or in response to resource exhaustion errors from the CSI driver, without requiring a component restart. This ensures the Kubernetes scheduler maintains an accurate view of storage availability, preventing pod scheduling failures caused by outdated volume limits.
```

> This work was done as part of [KEP #4876](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4876) led by SIG Storage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #4876](https://kep.k8s.io/4876) led by SIG Storage.
```

This work was done as a part of [KEP #1710](http://kep.k8s.io/1710) led by SIG Node and SIG Storage. 

### API for external signing of Service Account tokens

In Kubernetes v1.36, the `ExternalServiceAccountTokenSigner` feature for service accounts graduates to stable, making it possible to offload token signing to an external system while still integrating cleanly with the Kubernetes API. Clusters can now rely on an external JWT signer for issuing projected service account tokens that follow the standard service account token format, including support for extended expiration when needed. This is especially useful for clusters that already rely on external identity or key management systems, allowing Kubernetes to integrate without duplicating key management inside the control plane.

> The kube-apiserver is wired to discover public keys from the external signer, cache them, and validate tokens it did not sign itself, so existing RBAC and authentication flows continue to work as expected. Over the alpha and beta phases, the API and configuration for the external signer plugin, path validation, and OIDC discovery were hardened to handle real-world deployments and rotation patterns safely. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `kube-apiserver` is wired to discover public keys from the external signer, cache them, and validate tokens it did not sign itself, so existing RBAC and authentication flows continue to work as expected. Over the alpha and beta phases, the API and configuration for the external signer plugin, path validation, and OIDC discovery were hardened to handle real-world deployments and rotation patterns safely. 
```

With GA in v1.36, `ExternalServiceAccountTokenSigner` is now a fully supported option for platforms that centralize identity and signing, simplifying integration with external IAM systems and reducing the need to manage signing keys directly inside the control plane.

> This work was done as part of [KEP #740](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/740) led by SIG Auth

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #740](https://kep.k8s.io/740) led by SIG Auth
```

### DRA features graduating to Stable

> Part of the Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) ecosystem reaches full production maturity in Kubernetes v1.36 as key governance and selection features graduate to Stable. The transition of Admin Access to GA provides a permanent, secure framework for cluster administrators to access and manage hardware resources globally, while the stabilization of Prioritized Lists ensures that resource selection logic remains consistent and predictable across all cluster environments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Part of the Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) ecosystem reaches full production maturity in Kubernetes v1.36 as key governance and selection features graduate to Stable. The transition of [admin access](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/#admin-access) to GA provides a permanent, secure framework for cluster administrators to access and manage hardware resources globally, while the stabilization of [prioritized list](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/#prioritized-list) ensures that resource selection logic remains consistent and predictable across all cluster environments.
```

Now, organizations can confidently deploy mission-critical hardware automation with the guarantee of long-term API stability and backward compatibility. These features empower users to implement sophisticated resource-sharing policies and administrative overrides that are essential for large-scale GPU clusters and multi-tenant AI platforms, marking the completion of the core architectural foundation for next-generation resource management.

> This work was done as part of KEPs [#5018](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5018) and [#4816](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4816) led by SIG Auth and SIG Scheduling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of KEPs [#5018](https://kep.k8s.io/5018) and [#4816](https://kep.k8s.io/4816) led by SIG Auth and SIG Scheduling.
```

> ### Mutating Admission Policies

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Mutating admission policies
```

Reviewer 3: I believe this is unresolved

> Declarative cluster management reaches a new level of sophistication in Kubernetes v1.36 with the graduation of Mutating Admission Policies to Stable. This milestone provides a native, high-performance alternative to traditional webhooks by allowing administrators to define resource mutations directly in the API server using the Common Expression Language (CEL), fully replacing the need for external infrastructure for many common use cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Declarative cluster management reaches a new level of sophistication in Kubernetes v1.36 with the graduation of mutating admission policies to stable. This milestone provides a native, high-performance alternative to traditional webhooks by allowing administrators to define resource mutations directly in the API server using the Common Expression Language (CEL), fully replacing the need for external infrastructure for many common use cases.
```

Now, cluster operators can modify incoming requests without the latency and operational complexity associated with managing custom admission webhooks. By moving mutation logic into a declarative, versioned policy, organizations can achieve more predictable cluster behavior, reduced network overhead, and a hardened security model with the full guarantee of long-term API stability.

> This work was done as part of [KEP #3962](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3962) led by SIG API Machinery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #3962](https://kep.k8s.io/3962) led by SIG API Machinery.
```

> ### Declarative Validation Of Kubernetes Native Types With validation-gen

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Declarative validation of Kubernetes native types with `validation-gen`
```

Reviewer 3: I believe this is unresolved

> The development of custom resources reaches a new level of efficiency in Kubernetes v1.36 as Declarative Validation with validation-gen graduates to Stable. This milestone replaces the manual and often error-prone task of writing complex OpenAPI schemas by allowing developers to define sophisticated validation logic directly within Go struct tags using the Common Expression Language (CEL).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes v1.36, Declarative Validation for Kubernetes native types graduates to stable. This enhancement streamlines the development of built-in APIs by replacing the manual, error-prone process of writing validation logic in Go code (`validation.go`) with an automated approach using the `validation-gen` tool.
```

> Now, developers can rely on a fully stabilized toolset to automatically generate robust API validation rules at compile-time, ensuring that Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) remain perfectly synchronized with their source code. By baking validation directly into the development workflow, this enhancement eliminates configuration drift and guarantees that high-quality, self-validating APIs are delivered with long-term compatibility and reduced maintenance overhead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead of writing custom validation functions, Kubernetes contributors can now define validation rules using IDL marker comments (such as `+k8s:minimum` or `+k8s:enum`) directly within the API type definitions (`types.go`). The `validation-gen` tool parses these comments to automatically generate robust API validation code at compile-time. This reduces maintenance overhead and ensures that API validation remains consistent and synchronized with the source code.
```

> This work was done as part of [KEP #5073](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5073) led by SIG API Machinery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #5073](https://kep.k8s.io/5073) led by SIG API Machinery.
```

### Remove gogo protobuf dependency for Kubernetes API types

> Security and long-term maintainability for the Kubernetes codebase take a major step forward in Kubernetes v1.36 with the graduation of the Gogo Protobuf Removal to Stable. This initiative eliminates a significant dependency on the unmaintained `gogoprotobuf` library, which had become a source of potential security vulnerabilities and a blocker for adopting modern Go language features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes v1.36, the initiative to remove the runtime and generation-time dependencies on the unmaintained `gogoprotobuf` library reaches its final milestone. The `gogoprotobuf` dependency had become frozen, making it difficult to address potential vulnerabilities, bugs, or to adopt modern Go language features.
```

> Now, the project has successfully transitioned to the official `google.golang.org/protobuf` and `protoc-gen-go` toolchains, ensuring that core Kubernetes components are built on a modern, actively supported foundation. While this change is largely internal to the codebase, it guarantees a more secure and stable ecosystem for all users by removing technical debt and enabling the project to leverage the latest performance optimizations and security patches in the Go ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead of migrating to standard protobuf generation, which presented compatibility risks for Kubernetes API types, the project opted to fork and internalize the required generation logic within `k8s.io/code-generator`. This approach successfully eliminates the unmaintained runtime dependencies from the Kubernetes dependency graph while preserving existing API behavior and serialization compatibility. For consumers of Kubernetes API Go types, this change reduces technical debt and prevents accidental misuse with standard protobuf libraries.
```

> This work was done as part of [KEP #5589](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5589) led by SIG API Machinery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #5589](https://kep.k8s.io/5589) led by SIG API Machinery.
```

### Node log query

> Previously, Kubernetes required cluster administrators to log into nodes via SSH or implement a client-side reader for debugging issues pertaining to control-plane or worker nodes. While certain issues still require direct node access, issues with the kube-proxy or kubelet can be diagnosed by inspecting their logs. Node logs offer cluster administrators a method to view these logs using the kubelet API and kubectl plugin to simplify troubleshooting without logging into nodes, similar to debugging issues related to a pod or container. This method is operating system agnostic and requires the services or nodes to log to `/var/log`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously, Kubernetes required cluster administrators to log into nodes via SSH or implement a client-side reader for debugging issues pertaining to control-plane or worker nodes. While certain issues still require direct node access, issues with the `kube-proxy` or `kubelet` can be diagnosed by inspecting their logs. Node logs offer cluster administrators a method to view these logs using the kubelet API and `kubectl` plugin to simplify troubleshooting without logging into nodes, similar to debugging issues related to a Pod or container. This method is operating system agnostic and requires the services or nodes to log to `/var/log`. 
```

> As this feature reaches GA in Kubernetes 1.36 after thorough performance validation on production workloads, it is enabled by default on the kubelet through the `NodeLogQuery` feature gate. In addition, the `enableSystemLogQuery` kubelet configuration option must also be enabled. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As this feature reaches GA in Kubernetes 1.36 after thorough performance validation on production workloads, it is enabled by default on the `kubelet` through the `NodeLogQuery` feature gate. In addition, the `enableSystemLogQuery` kubelet configuration option must also be enabled. 
```

This work was done as a part of [KEP #2258](http://kep.k8s.io/2258) led by SIG Windows.

### Support User Namespaces in pods

> Container isolation and node security reach a major maturity milestone in Kubernetes v1.36 as support for User Namespaces graduates to Stable. This long-awaited feature provides a critical layer of defense-in-depth by allowing the mapping of a container's root user to a non-privileged user on the host, ensuring that even if a process escapes the container, it possesses no administrative power over the underlying node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Container isolation and node security reach a major maturity milestone in Kubernetes v1.36 as support for User Namespaces graduates to stable. This long-awaited feature provides a critical layer of defense-in-depth by allowing the mapping of a container's root user to a non-privileged user on the host, ensuring that even if a process escapes the container, it possesses no administrative power over the underlying node.
```

Now, cluster operators can confidently enable this hardened isolation for production workloads to mitigate the impact of container breakout vulnerabilities. By decoupling the container's internal identity from the host's identity, Kubernetes provides a robust, standardized mechanism to protect multi-tenant environments and sensitive infrastructure from unauthorized access, all with the full guarantee of long-term API stability.

> This work was done as part of [KEP #127](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/127) led by SIG Node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #127](https://kep.k8s.io/127) led by SIG Node.
```

### Support PSI based on cgroupv2

> Node resource management and observability become more precise in Kubernetes v1.36 as the export of Pressure Stall Information (PSI) metrics graduates to Stable. This feature provides the kubelet with the ability to report "pressure" metrics for CPU, memory, and I/O, offering a more granular view of resource contention than traditional utilization metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes v1.36, the export of Pressure Stall Information (PSI) metrics graduates to stable. This feature allows the `kubelet` to report pressure metrics for CPU, memory, and I/O, offering a more granular view of resource contention than traditional utilization metrics.
```

> Now, cluster operators and autoscalers can distinguish between a system that is simply busy and one that is actively stalling due to resource exhaustion. By leveraging these high-fidelity signals, users can more accurately tune pod resource requests, improve the reliability of vertical autoscaling, and detect "noisy neighbor" effects before they lead to application performance degradation or node instability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cluster operators and autoscalers can use these metrics to distinguish between a system that is simply busy and one that is actively stalling due to resource exhaustion. By leveraging these signals, users can more accurately tune pod resource requests, improve the reliability of vertical autoscaling, and detect noisy neighbor effects before they lead to application performance degradation or node instability.
```

> This work was done as part of [KEP #4205](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4205) led by SIG Node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #4205](https://kep.k8s.io/4205) led by SIG Node.
```

> ### VolumeSource: OCI Artifact and/or Image

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### VolumeSource: OCI artifact and/or image
```

Reviewer 3: I believe this is unresolved

> The distribution of container data becomes more flexible in Kubernetes v1.36 as OCI Volume Sources graduate to Stable. This feature moves beyond the traditional requirement of mounting volumes from external storage providers or config maps by allowing the kubelet to pull and mount content directly from any OCI-compliant registry, such as a container image or an artifact repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The distribution of container data becomes more flexible in Kubernetes v1.36 as OCI Volume Sources graduate to stable. This feature moves beyond the traditional requirement of mounting Volumes from external storage providers or config maps by allowing the `kubelet` to pull and mount content directly from any OCI-compliant registry, such as a container image or an artifact repository.
```

Now, developers and platform engineers can package application data, models, or static assets as OCI artifacts and deliver them to pods using the same registries and versioning workflows they already use for container images. This convergence of image and volume management simplifies CI/CD pipelines, reduces dependency on specialized storage backends for read-only content, and ensures that data remains portable and securely accessible across any environment.

> This work was done as part of [KEP #4639](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4639) led by SIG Node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #4639](https://kep.k8s.io/4639) led by SIG Node.
```

## New features in Beta

This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now beta following the v1.36 release.

### IP/CIDR validation improvements

In Kubernetes v1.36, the `StrictIPCIDRValidation` feature for API IP and CIDR fields graduates to beta, tightening validation to catch malformed addresses and prefixes that previously slipped through. This helps prevent subtle configuration bugs where Services, Pods, NetworkPolicies, or other resources reference invalid IPs, which could otherwise lead to confusing runtime behavior or security surprises. 

> Controllers are updated to canonicalize IPs they write back into objects and to warn when they encounter bad values that were already stored, so clusters can gradually converge on clean, consistent data. The stricter checks are guarded by a feature gate and have been iterated in alpha with feedback from real clusters, focusing on improving safety without breaking valid but unusual configurations. 

Reviewer 4: controllers canonicalize IPs, _the apiserver_ warns about bad pre-existing values. (But neither of those is new in 1.36; both started happening, un-feature-gated, several releases ago.)

The part about "have been iterated in alpha with feedback from real clusters, focusing on improving safety without breaking valid but unusual configurations" is an AI hallucination 😄. That didn't happen. (I assume it's referring to the fact that there was an update to the KEP for Beta, but that was just to make the KEP accurately reflect the Alpha implementation.)

(so maybe this whole paragraph could just go away)

Author: Ah, yes that makes sense. Thank you for the correction here.

With beta, `StrictIPCIDRValidation` is ready for wider use, giving operators more reliable guardrails around IP-related configuration as they evolve networks and policies over time.

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #4858](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4858) led by SIG Network

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as a part of [KEP #4858](https://kep.k8s.io/4858) led by SIG Network
```

### Separate kubectl user preferences from cluster configs

> In Kubernetes v1.36, the `.kuberc` feature for customizing `kubectl` user preferences graduates to beta and is enabled by default. The `~/.kube/kuberc` file allows users to store aliases, default flags, and other personal settings separately from `kubeconfig` files, which hold cluster endpoints and credentials. This separation prevents personal preferences from interfering with CI pipelines or shared `kubeconfig` files, while maintaining a consistent `kubectl` experience across different clusters and contexts.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The `.kuberc` feature for customizing `kubectl` user preferences continues to be beta and enabled by default. The `~/.kube/kuberc` file allows users to store aliases, default flags, and other personal settings separately from `kubeconfig` files, which hold cluster endpoints and credentials. This separation prevents personal preferences from interfering with CI pipelines or shared `kubeconfig` files, while maintaining a consistent `kubectl` experience across different clusters and contexts.
```

Reviewer 5: This one still holds.

> In Kubernetes v1.36, the `.kuberc` feature for kubectl user preferences continues to mature, building on its earlier alpha and beta releases to make client‑side customization first‑class. With `~/.kube/kuberc`, you can keep aliases, default flags, color and output tweaks, and other personal settings separate from kubeconfig files that hold cluster endpoints and credentials. This separation helps avoid breaking CI pipelines or shared kubeconfigs with someone’s local preferences, while still letting users carry a consistent kubectl experience across all clusters and contexts. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes v1.36, the `.kuberc` feature for customizing `kubectl` user preferences graduates to beta and is enabled by default. The `~/.kube/kuberc` file allows users to store aliases, default flags, and other personal settings separately from `kubeconfig` files, which hold cluster endpoints and credentials. This separation prevents personal preferences from interfering with CI pipelines or shared `kubeconfig` files, while maintaining a consistent `kubectl` experience across different clusters and contexts.
```

> Using the `kubectl.config.k8s.io/v1beta1` schema, teams can define aliases, set default options, and establish policies for credential plugins (including allowlists) to enforce safer authentication practices. Users can disable this functionality if needed by setting the `KUBECTL_KUBERC=false` or `KUBERC=off` environment variables.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes v1.36, `.kuberc` was expanded with the ability to define policies for credential plugins (allowlist or denylists) to enforce safer authentication practicies. Users can disable this functionality if needed by setting the `KUBECTL_KUBERC=false` or `KUBERC=off` environment variables.
```

Reviewer 5: This one still holds too.

Author: Thank you. I have addressed this.

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #3104](https://kep.k8s.io/3104) led by SIG Auth

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This expansion was done as a part of [KEP #3104](https://kep.k8s.io/3104) led by SIG CLI, with the help from SIG Auth.
```

> The schema, `kubectl.config.k8s.io/v1beta1`, supports defining aliases, default options, and credential plugin policies (including allowlists), so teams can also codify safer authentication practices for kubectl. With this release, kuberc is documented, covered by tests, and enabled via feature gate and environment variable controls, making it ready for wider adoption in both developer laptops and automated environments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the `kubectl.config.k8s.io/v1beta1` schema, teams can define aliases, set default options, and establish policies for credential plugins (including allowlists) to enforce safer authentication practices. Users can disable this functionality if needed by setting the `KUBECTL_KUBERC=false` or `KUBERC=off` environment variables.
```

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #3104](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3104) led by SIG Auth

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as a part of [KEP #3104](https://kep.k8s.io/3104) led by SIG Auth
```

> ### Mutable Container Resources when Job is suspended

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Mutable container resources when Job is suspended
```

> In Kubernetes v1.36, the MutablePodResourcesForSuspendedJobs feature for Jobs graduates to beta, relaxing validation so you can update container CPU, memory, GPU, and extended resource requests and limits while a Job is suspended. This gives queue controllers and operators a safe hook to right‑size batch workloads based on real‑time cluster conditions, rather than locking in resource guesses made at submit time. For example, a queueing system can suspend incoming Jobs, adjust their resource requirements to match available capacity or quota, then unsuspend them once the cluster can actually run them. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes v1.36, the `MutablePodResourcesForSuspendedJobs` feature graduates to beta and is enabled by default. This update modifies Job validation to allow updates to container CPU, memory, GPU, and extended resource requests and limits while a Job is suspended. 

This capability allows queue controllers and operators to adjust batch workload requirements based on real‑time cluster conditions. For example, a queueing system can suspend incoming Jobs, adjust their resource requirements to match available capacity or quota, and then unsuspend them. The feature strictly limits mutability to suspended Jobs (or Jobs whose pods have been terminated upon suspension) to prevent disruptive changes to actively running pods. 
```

Reviewer 5: I'd probably even say that: 
```
This update relaxes Job validation to allow updates to container CPU, memory, 
GPU, and extended resource requests and limits while a Job is suspended.
```

> The feature carefully scopes mutability to suspended Jobs (and Jobs whose pods have been terminated on suspension), avoiding disruptive changes to actively running pods while still enabling workflows like “checkpoint, suspend, resize, resume.” With beta, the feature is enabled by default behind two feature gates, covered by unit, integration, and (for beta) e2e tests, and is already in use by higher‑level controllers such as Kueue and JobSet for more efficient GPU and batch scheduling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By eliminating the need to delete and recreate Jobs to change resource requirements, this feature improves integration with higher-level controllers like Kueue and JobSet for more efficient batch scheduling.
```

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #5440](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5440) led by SIG Apps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as a part of [KEP #5440](https://kep.k8s.io/5440) led by SIG Apps.
```

> ### Constrained Impersonation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Constrained impersonation
```

In Kubernetes v1.36, the `ConstrainedImpersonation` feature for user impersonation graduates to beta, tightening a historically all‑or‑nothing mechanism into something that can actually follow least‑privilege principles. When this feature is enabled, an impersonator must have two distinct sets of permissions: one to impersonate a given identity, and another to perform specific actions on that identity’s behalf. This prevents support tools, controllers, or node agents from using impersonation to gain broader access than they themselves are allowed, even if their impersonation RBAC is misconfigured. Existing impersonate rules keep working, but the API server prefers the new constrained checks first, making the transition incremental instead of a flag day. With beta in v1.36, `ConstrainedImpersonation` is tested, documented, and ready for wider adoption by platform teams that rely on impersonation for debugging, proxying, or node‑level controllers.

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #5284](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5284) led by SIG Auth

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as a part of [KEP #5284](https://kep.k8s.io/5284) led by SIG Auth
```

### DRA features in beta

> The Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) framework reaches another maturity milestone in Kubernetes v1.36 as several core features graduate to Beta and are enabled by default. This transition moves DRA beyond basic allocation by graduating Partitionable Devices and Consumable Capacity, allowing for more granular sharing of hardware like GPUs, while Device Taints and Tolerations ensure that specialized resources are only utilized by the appropriate workloads.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA)](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/) framework reaches another maturity milestone in Kubernetes v1.36 as several core features graduate to beta and are enabled by default. This transition moves DRA beyond basic allocation by graduating [partitionable devices](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/#partitionable-devices) and [consumable capacity](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/#consumable-capacity), allowing for more granular sharing of hardware like GPUs, while [device taints and tolerations](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/#device-taints-and-tolerations) ensure that specialized resources are only utilized by the appropriate workloads.
```

> The Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) framework reaches a major maturity milestone in Kubernetes v1.36 as several core features graduate to Beta and are enabled by default. This transition moves DRA beyond basic allocation by introducing Partitionable Devices  and Consumable Capacit, allowing for more granular sharing of hardware like GPUs, while Device Taints and Tolerations  ensure that specialized resources are only utilized by the appropriate workloads.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) framework reaches another maturity milestone in Kubernetes v1.36 as several core features graduate to Beta and are enabled by default. This transition moves DRA beyond basic allocation by graduating Partitionable Devices and Consumable Capacity, allowing for more granular sharing of hardware like GPUs, while Device Taints and Tolerations ensure that specialized resources are only utilized by the appropriate workloads.
```

> Now, users benefit from a much more reliable and observable resource lifecycle through Resource Claim Device Status  and the ability to ensure Device Attachment before Pod Scheduling. By integrating these features with Extended Resource support, Kubernetes provides a robust production-ready alternative to the legacy device plugin system, enabling complex AI and HPC workloads to manage hardware with unprecedented precision and operational safety.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, users benefit from a much more reliable and observable resource lifecycle through [ResourceClaim device status]/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/#resourceclaim-device-status) and the ability to ensure device attachment before Pod scheduling. By integrating these features with [extended resource](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/#extended-resource) support, Kubernetes provides a robust production-ready alternative to the legacy device plugin system, enabling complex AI and HPC workloads to manage hardware with unprecedented precision and operational safety.
```

> This work was done across several KEPs (including [#5004](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5004), [#4817](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4817), [#5055](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5055), [#5075](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5075), [#4815](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5075), and [#5007](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5007)) led by SIG Scheduling and SIG Node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done across several KEPs (including [#5004](https://kep.k8s.io/5004), [#4817](https://kep.k8s.io/4817), [#5055](https://kep.k8s.io/5055), [#5075](https://kep.k8s.io/5075), [#4815](https://kep.k8s.io/5075), and [#5007](https://kep.k8s.io/5007)) led by SIG Scheduling and SIG Node.
```

### Statusz for Kubernetes Components

In Kubernetes v1.36, the `ComponentStatusz` feature for core Kubernetes components graduates to beta, standardizing a `/statusz` endpoint that surfaces real‑time build and version details for each component. This low‑overhead z‑page exposes information like start time, uptime, Go version, binary version, emulation version, and minimum compatibility version, so operators and developers can quickly see exactly what is running without digging through logs or configs. 

The endpoint offers a human‑readable text view by default, plus a versioned structured API (config.k8s.io/Statusz) for programmatic access in JSON, YAML, or CBOR via explicit content negotiation. Access is restricted to the `system:monitoring` group, keeping it aligned with existing protections on health and metrics endpoints and avoiding exposure of sensitive data. 

With beta, `ComponentStatusz` is enabled by default across all core control‑plane components and node agents, backed by unit, integration, and end‑to‑end tests so it can be safely used in production for observability and debugging workflows.

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #4827](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4827) led by SIG Instrumentation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as a part of [KEP #4827](https://kep.k8s.io/4827) led by SIG Instrumentation
```

### Flagz for Kubernetes Components 

In Kubernetes v1.36, the `ComponentFlagz` feature for core Kubernetes components graduates to beta, standardizing a `/flagz` endpoint that exposes the effective command‑line flags each component was started with. This gives cluster operators and developers real‑time, in‑cluster visibility into component configuration, making it much easier to debug unexpected behavior or verify that a flag rollout actually took effect after a restart. 

The endpoint supports both a human‑readable text view and a versioned structured API (initially `config.k8s.io/v1alpha1`), so you can either curl it during an incident or wire it into automated tooling once you are ready. Access is restricted to the `system:monitoring` group and sensitive values can be redacted, keeping configuration insight aligned with existing security practices around health and status endpoints. 

With beta, `ComponentFlagz` is now enabled by default and implemented across all core control‑plane components and node agents, backed by unit, integration, and end‑to‑end tests to ensure the endpoint is reliable in production clusters.

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #4828](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4828) led by SIG Instrumentation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as a part of [KEP #4828](https://kep.k8s.io/4828) led by SIG Instrumentation
```

### Mixed Version Proxy (aka Unknown Version Interoperability Proxy)

In Kubernetes v1.36, the Mixed Version Proxy feature graduates to beta, building on its alpha introduction in v1.28 to provide safer control-plane upgrades for mixed-version clusters. Each API request can now be routed to the apiserver instance that serves the requested group, version, and resource, reducing 404s and failures due to version skew. 

The feature relies on peer-aggregated discovery, so apiservers share information about which resources and versions they expose, then use that data to transparently reroute requests when needed. New metrics on rerouted traffic and proxy behavior help operators understand how often requests are forwarded and to which peers. Together, these changes make it easier to run highly available, mixed-version API control planes in production while performing multi-step or partial control-plane upgrades.

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #4020](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4020) led by SIG API-Machinery

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as a part of [KEP #4020](https://kep.k8s.io/4020) led by SIG API-Machinery
```

Reviewer 6: nit: `SIG API-Machinery` or `SIG API Machinery`? Align with the above (SIG API Machinery)

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #4020](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4020) led by SIG API-Machinery

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This work was done as a part of [KEP #4020](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4020) led by SIG API Machinery
```

### Support memory qos with cgroups v2

Kubernetes now enhances MemoryQoS on cgroup v2 nodes with smarter, tiered memory protection that better aligns kernel controls with pod requests and limits, reducing interference and thrashing for workloads sharing the same node. This iteration also refines how kubelet programs memory.high and memory.min, adds metrics and safeguards to avoid livelocks, and introduces configuration options so cluster operators can tune memory protection behavior for their environments.

> This work was done as part of [KEP #2570](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2570) led by SIG Node

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #2570](https://kep.k8s.io/2570) led by SIG Node
```

## New features in Alpha

This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now alpha following the v1.36 release.

### Staleness mitigation for controllers

Staleness in Kubernetes controllers is a problem that affects many controllers and can subtly affect controller behavior. It is usually not until it is too late, when a controller in production has already taken incorrect action, that staleness is found to be an issue due to some underlying assumption made by the controller author. Some issues caused by staleness include controllers taking incorrect actions, not taking action when they should, and taking too long to act. We are excited to announce that Kubernetes v1.36 includes new features that help mitigate controller staleness and provide better observability of controller behavior.

> This work was done as part of [KEP #5647](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5647) led by SIG API Machinery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #5647](https://kep.k8s.io/5647) led by SIG API Machinery.
```

### HPA Scale to Zero for Custom Metrics

> Since now, the Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) required a minimum of at least one replica to remain active, as it could only calculate scaling needs based on metrics (like CPU or Memory) from running pods. Kubernetes v1.36 continues the development of the HPA Scale to Zero feature in Alpha, allowing workloads to scale down to zero replicas specifically when using Object or External metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since now, the Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) required a minimum of at least one replica to remain active, as it could only calculate scaling needs based on metrics (like CPU or Memory) from running pods. Kubernetes v1.36 continues the development of the HPA Scale to Zero feature in alpha, allowing workloads to scale down to zero replicas specifically when using Object or External metrics.
```

Now, users can experiment with significantly reducing infrastructure costs by completely idling heavy workloads when no work is pending. While the feature remains behind the HPAScaleToZero feature gate, it enables the HPA to stay active even with zero running pods, automatically scaling the deployment back up as soon as the external metric (e.g., queue length) indicates that new tasks have arrived.

> This work was done as part of [KEP #2021](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2021) led by SIG Autoscaling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #2021](https://kep.k8s.io/2021) led by SIG Autoscaling.
```

### DRA features in Alpha

> Historically, the Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) framework lacked seamless integration with high-level controllers and provided limited visibility into device-specific metadata or availability. Kubernetes v1.36 introduces a wave of DRA enhancements in Alpha, including native ResourceClaim support for workloads, which allows Deployments and StatefulSets to manage hardware claims automatically, and DRA Native Resources to simplify how drivers define hardware classes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Historically, the Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) framework lacked seamless integration with high-level controllers and provided limited visibility into device-specific metadata or availability. Kubernetes v1.36 introduces a wave of DRA enhancements in alpha, including native ResourceClaim support for workloads, which allows Deployments and StatefulSets to manage hardware claims automatically, and DRA Native Resources to simplify how drivers define hardware classes.
```

> Historically, the Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) framework lacked seamless integration with high-level controllers and provided limited visibility into device-specific metadata or availability. Kubernetes v1.36 introduces a wave of DRA enhancements in Alpha, including native ResourceClaim support for Workloads, which allows Deployments and StatefulSets to manage hardware claims automatically, and DRA Native Resources to simplify how drivers define hardware classes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Historically, the Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) framework lacked seamless integration with high-level controllers and provided limited visibility into device-specific metadata or availability. Kubernetes v1.36 introduces a wave of DRA enhancements in Alpha, including native ResourceClaim support for workloads, which allows Deployments and StatefulSets to manage hardware claims automatically, and DRA Native Resources to simplify how drivers define hardware classes.
```

Now, users can leverage the Downward API to expose complex resource attributes directly to containers and benefit from improved Resource Availability Visibility for more predictable scheduling. These updates, combined with support for List Types in attributes, transform DRA from a low-level primitive into a robust system capable of handling the sophisticated networking and compute requirements of modern AI and high-performance computing (HPC) stacks.

> This work was done across several KEPs (including [#5729](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5729), [#5304](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5304), [#5517](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5517), [#5677](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5677), and [#5491](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5491)) led by SIG Scheduling and SIG Node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done across several KEPs (including [#5729](https://kep.k8s.io/5729), [#5304](https://kep.k8s.io/5304), [#5517](https://kep.k8s.io/5517), [#5677](https://kep.k8s.io/5677), and [#5491](https://kep.k8s.io/5491)) led by SIG Scheduling and SIG Node.
```

### Native Histogram Support for Kubernetes Metrics

> High-resolution monitoring reaches a new milestone in Kubernetes v1.36 with the introduction of Native Histogram support in Alpha. While classical Prometheus histograms relied on static, pre-defined buckets that often forced a compromise between data accuracy and memory usage, this update allows the control plane to export sparse histograms that dynamically adjust their resolution based on real-time data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
High-resolution monitoring reaches a new milestone in Kubernetes v1.36 with the introduction of Native Histogram support in alpha. While classical Prometheus histograms relied on static, pre-defined buckets that often forced a compromise between data accuracy and memory usage, this update allows the control plane to export sparse histograms that dynamically adjust their resolution based on real-time data.
```

Now, cluster operators can capture precise latency distributions for the kube-apiserver and other core components without the overhead of manual bucket management. This architectural shift ensures more reliable SLIs and SLOs, providing high-fidelity heatmaps that remain accurate even during the most unpredictable workload spikes.

> This work was done as part of [KEP #5808](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5808) led by SIG Instrumentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #5808](https://kep.k8s.io/5808) led by SIG Instrumentation.
```

### Manifest Based Admission Control Config

> Managing admission controllers moves toward a more declarative and consistent model in Kubernetes v1.36 with the introduction of Manifest-based Admission Control Configuration in Alpha. This change addresses the long-standing challenge of configuring admission plugins through disparate command-line flags or separate, complex config files by allowing administrators to define the desired state of admission control directly through a structured manifest.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Managing admission controllers moves toward a more declarative and consistent model in Kubernetes v1.36 with the introduction of Manifest-based Admission Control Configuration in alpha. This change addresses the long-standing challenge of configuring admission plugins through disparate command-line flags or separate, complex config files by allowing administrators to define the desired state of admission control directly through a structured manifest.
```

Now, cluster operators can manage admission plugin settings with the same versioned, declarative workflows used for other Kubernetes objects, significantly reducing the risk of configuration drift and manual errors during cluster upgrades. By centralizing these configurations into a unified manifest, the kube-apiserver becomes easier to audit and automate, paving the way for more secure and reproducible cluster deployments.

This work was done as part of [KEP #5793](https://kep.k8s.io/5793) led by SIG API Machinery.

> ### Stale Controller Mitigation

Reviewer 5: You have this already covered above in `### Staleness mitigation for controllers` section. Squash both together.

Author: good catch! thank you. I have combined them :)

> This work was done as part of [KEP #5793](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5793) led by SIG API Machinery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #5793](https://kep.k8s.io/5793) led by SIG API Machinery.
```

> Kubernetes v1.36 introduces a more robust mechanism for Stale Controller Handling in Alpha, addressing the risks posed by "zombie" controllers that continue to act on outdated information after a network partition or a crash. In the past, the lack of a standardized way to detect and block requests from stale controller instances could lead to conflicting updates or data corruption when a new instance of the same controller took over.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes v1.36, the Stale Controller Detection and Mitigation feature is introduced as an alpha capability. This feature addresses the issue where controllers operate on an outdated local cache due to delays in the watch stream from the API server, which can lead to spurious reconciles and incorrect actions.
```

> Now, the kube-apiserver can leverage the ControllerTerm in the Lease object to verify that a controller is the current valid leader before committing changes. This ensures that only the active, authoritative controller can modify resources, providing higher reliability for mission-critical automation and preventing the race conditions that commonly plague distributed control loops during failover events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rather than relying on the API server to block requests, this opt-in mechanism allows controllers to verify if their previous writes have successfully propagated to their local cache. By tracking resource versions, a controller can automatically skip reconciliation until its cache is up to date, ensuring it only acts on current data.
```

> This work was done as part of [KEP #5647](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5647) led by SIG API Machinery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #5647](https://kep.k8s.io/5647) led by SIG API Machinery.
```

### CRI List Streaming

> Cluster performance and scalability receive a significant boost in Kubernetes v1.36 with the introduction of CRI List Streaming in Alpha. This enhancement addresses the memory pressure and latency spikes often seen on large-scale nodes by replacing traditional, monolithic "List" requests between the kubelet and the container runtime with a more efficient server-side streaming RPC.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cluster performance and scalability receive a significant boost in Kubernetes v1.36 with the introduction of CRI List Streaming in alpha. This enhancement addresses the memory pressure and latency spikes often seen on large-scale nodes by replacing traditional, monolithic "List" requests between the kubelet and the container runtime with a more efficient server-side streaming RPC.
```

> Cluster performance and scalability receive a significant boost in Kubernetes v1.36 with the introduction of CRI List Streaming in Alpha. This enhancement addresses the memory pressure and latency spikes often seen on large-scale nodes by replacing traditional, monolithic "List" requests between the kubelet and the container runtime with a more efficient server-side streaming RPC.

Reviewer 7: I wouldn't call this scalability, the concept here is totally different. Even the KEP doesn't mention any scalability. Please avoid misusing the term.

Author: got it. Thanks.

Now, instead of waiting for a single, massive response containing all container or image data, the kubelet can process results incrementally as they are streamed. This shift significantly reduces the peak memory footprint of the kubelet and improves responsiveness on high-density nodes, ensuring that cluster management remains fluid even as the number of containers per node continues to grow.

> This work was done as part of [KEP #5825](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5825) led by SIG Node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #5825](https://kep.k8s.io/5825) led by SIG Node.
```

## Other notable changes

### Ingress NGINX retirement

To prioritize the safety and security of the ecosystem, Kubernetes SIG Network and the Security Response Committee have retired Ingress NGINX on March 24, 2026.

> Since that date, there have been no further releases, no bugfixes, and no updates to resolve any security vulnerabilities discovered. Existing deployments of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There will be no further releases, no bugfixes, and no updates to resolve any security vulnerabilities reported after that date. Existing deployments of
```

Ingress NGINX will continue to function, and installation artifacts like Helm charts and container images will remain available. 

For full details, see the [official retirement announcement](/blog/2025/11/11/ingress-nginx-retirement/).

## Graduations, deprecations, and removals in v1.36

### Graduations to stable

This lists all the features that graduated to stable (also known as general availability). For a full list of updates including new features and graduations from alpha to beta, see the release notes.

> This release includes a total of XXX enhancements promoted to stable:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This release includes a total of 18 enhancements promoted to stable:
```

> - [Support User Namespaces in pods](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/127)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Support User Namespaces in pods](https://kep.k8s.io/127)
```

> - [API for external signing of Service Account tokens](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/740)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [API for external signing of Service Account tokens](https://kep.k8s.io/740)
```

change all the link in the list pls

- [add ProcMount option](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4265)
- [DRA: Extend PodResources to include resources from Dynamic Resource Allocation](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3695)
- [VolumeSource: OCI Artifact and/or Image](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4639)
- [Split L3 Cache Topology Awareness in CPU Manager](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5109)
- [DRA: AdminAccess for ResourceClaims and ResourceClaimTemplates](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5018)
- [Remove gogo protobuf dependency for Kubernetes API types](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5589)
- [CSI driver opt-in for service account tokens via secrets field](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5538)

## Deprecations removals, and community updates

As Kubernetes develops and matures, features may be deprecated, removed, or replaced with better ones to improve the project's overall health. See the Kubernetes deprecation and removal policy for more details on this process. Kubernetes v1.36 includes a couple of deprecations.

### Deprecate service.spec.externalIPs

> The `externalIPs` field in Service `spec` is deprecated, which means you no longer have a way to route arbitrary externalIPs to your Services. This field has been a known security headache for years, enabling man-in-the-middle attacks on your cluster traffic, as documented in [CVE-2020-8554](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/970760). From Kubernetes v1.36 and onwards, you will see deprecation warnings when using it, with full removal planned for v1.43.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `externalIPs` field in Service `spec` is deprecated, which means you no longer have an easy way to route arbitrary IPs to your Services. This field has been a known security headache for years, enabling man-in-the-middle attacks on your cluster traffic, as documented in [CVE-2020-8554](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/970760). From Kubernetes v1.36 and onwards, you will see deprecation warnings when using it, with full removal planned for v1.43.
```

Now, users can use `kubectl describe pod` to determine if a container's crash loop is due to an `Unhealthy` or `Unknown` device status, regardless of whether the hardware was provisioned via traditional plugins or the newer DRA framework. This enhanced visibility allows administrators and automated controllers to quickly identify faulty hardware and streamline the recovery of high-performance workloads.
This work was done as part of [KEP #4680](https://kep.k8s.io/4680) led by SIG Node.

### Alpha: Workload Aware Scheduling (WAS) features

Previously, the Kubernetes scheduler and job controllers managed pods as independent units, often leading to fragmented scheduling or resource waste for complex, distributed workloads. Kubernetes v1.36 introduces a comprehensive suite of Workload Aware Scheduling (WAS) features in Alpha, natively integrating the Job controller with a new Workload API and a decoupled PodGroup API to treat related pods as a single logical entity.

> Now, the scheduler can perform Gang Scheduling by ensuring a minimum number of pods are ready before any are bound, while new Topology-Aware and Preemption policies optimize placement within specific network or rack domains. This evolution significantly reduces the need for third-party schedulers in AI/ML and batch processing, allowing users to guarantee the tight physical co-location and atomic resource acquisition required for high-performance distributed training.

Reviewer 8: > Now, the scheduler can perform Gang Scheduling by ensuring a minimum number of pods are ready before any are bound

We started the WAS effort with a naive Gang Scheduling and Workload API implementation in v1.35. What's new in gang scheduling is a new PodGroup scheduling cycle, which atomically evaluates the entire pod group. And we changed the API to decouple PodGroup from Workload (what is mentioned above).

> while new Topology-Aware and Preemption policies optimize placement within specific network or rack domains

Topology-Aware Scheduling enforces the placement in the given domain, but the Workload-Aware Preemption is something different (and even disabled when the TAS is used). It allows to perform an atomic preemption operation for the entire pod group on the whole cluster and introduces pod group priority and disruption mode fields.

Our blog post for v1.36 describes these features more: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/54667

Author: Thank you for the clarification.

This convergence of image and volume management simplifies CI/CD pipelines, 
reduces dependency on specialized storage backends for read-only content, 
and ensures that data remains portable and securely accessible across any environment.

This work was done as part of [KEP #4639](https://kep.k8s.io/4639) led by SIG Node.

## New features in Beta

_This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now beta following the v1.36 release._

### Staleness mitigation for controllers

Staleness in Kubernetes controllers is a problem that affects many controllers and can subtly affect controller behavior. 
It is usually not until it is too late, when a controller in production has already taken incorrect action,
that staleness is found to be an issue due to some underlying assumption made by the controller author.
This could lead to conflicting updates or data corruption upon controller reconciliation during times of cache staleness.

We are excited to announce that Kubernetes v1.36 includes new features that help mitigate controller staleness and 
provide better observability of controller behavior.

> This ensures that only the active, authoritative controller can modify resources, providing higher 

Reviewer 9: Looks much better, thanks! However this isn't about active/ inactive controllers.

```
This ensures that the owning controller only modifies resources that it knows are fresh. 
```

Might be a better way to frame this. Thanks! Otherwise lgtm, cc @serathius if you have any thoughts on this.

Reviewer 7: Can remove `owning`, this KEP is not related to ownership.

`Ensuring that controller only modifies resources that it knows are fresh` that doesn't sounds very useful. 

Negation would help here like: `Prevents reconciliation based on outdated view of cluster state that can often lead to harmful behavior`

> reliability for mission-critical automation and preventing the race conditions that commonly plague 

Reviewer 7: There are no `race conditions` discussed in the KEP.

- [CSI driver opt-in for service account tokens via secrets field](https://kep.k8s.io/5538)

## Deprecations removals, and community updates

As Kubernetes develops and matures, features may be deprecated, removed, or replaced with better ones to improve the 
project's overall health. See the Kubernetes deprecation and removal policy for more details on this process. 
Kubernetes v1.36 includes a couple of deprecations.

### Deprecate service.spec.externalIPs

The `externalIPs` field in Service `spec` is deprecated, which means the functionality exists, but will no longer function in a future version of Kubernetes.
This field has been a known security headache for years, 
enabling man-in-the-middle attacks on your cluster traffic, as documented in [CVE-2020-8554](https:/github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/97076). 
From Kubernetes v1.36 and onwards, you will see deprecation warnings when using it, with full removal planned for v1.43.

If your Services still lean on `externalIPs`, consider using LoadBalancer services for cloud-managed ingress, 
NodePort for simple port exposure, or Gateway API for a more flexible and secure way to handle external traffic.

> For more details on this enhancement, refer to [KEP-5707: Deprecate service.spec.externalIPs](https://kep.k8s.io/5707)

Reviewer 10: LGTM, thanks for modifying it
@danwinship you good with this wording?

- [Support PSI based on cgroupv2](https://kep.k8s.io/4205)
- [add ProcMount option](https://kep.k8s.io/4265)
- [DRA: Extend PodResources to include resources from Dynamic Resource Allocation](https://kep.k8s.io/3695)
- [VolumeSource: OCI Artifact and/or Image](https://kep.k8s.io/4639)
- [Split L3 Cache Topology Awareness in CPU Manager](https://kep.k8s.io/5109)
- [DRA: AdminAccess for ResourceClaims and ResourceClaimTemplates](https://kep.k8s.io/5018)
- [Remove gogo protobuf dependency for Kubernetes API types](https://kep.k8s.io/5589)
- [CSI driver opt-in for service account tokens via secrets field](https://kep.k8s.io/5538)

## Deprecations removals, and community updates

As Kubernetes develops and matures, features may be deprecated, removed, or replaced with better ones to improve the 
project's overall health. See the Kubernetes deprecation and removal policy for more details on this process. 
Kubernetes v1.36 includes a couple of deprecations.

### Deprecate service.spec.externalIPs

The `externalIPs` field in Service `spec` is deprecated, which means the functionality exists, but there is no longer 

> support for routing arbitrary externalIPs to your Services. This field has been a known security headache for years, 

Reviewer 10: Thanks for updating it, I still feel as though it's ambiguous.
What about?

```suggestion
The `externalIPs` field in Service `spec` is deprecated, which means the functionality exists, but will no longer function in a future version of Kubernetes.
This field has been a known security headache for years, 
```

Something along those lines?

---  
layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes v1.36: RELEASE NAME'
date: 2026-04-22T10:30:00-08:00
draft: true
evergreen: true
slug: kubernetes-v1-36-release
author: >
  [Kubernetes v1.36 Release Team](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/blob/master/releases/release-1.36/release-team.md)
release_announcement:

>   minor_version: “1.36”

Reviewer 11: Use plain quotes.

```suggestion
  minor_version: "1.36"
```

---

**Editors:** Chad M. Crowell, Kirti Goyal, Sophia Ugochukwu, Swathi Rao, Utkarsh Umre

Similar to previous releases, the release of Kubernetes v1.36 introduces new stable, beta, and alpha features. The consistent delivery of high-quality releases underscores the strength of our development cycle and the vibrant support from our community.

> This release consists of 70 enhancements. Of those enhancements, 18 have graduated to Stable, 25 are entering Beta, and 25 have graduated to Alpha.

Reviewer 11: The numbers here don’t seem to align with what’s currently on the [tracking board (see here)](https://github.com/orgs/kubernetes/projects/241/views/1?groupedBy%5BcolumnId%5D=251340560).

Clusters can now rely on an external JWT signer for issuing projected service account tokens that 
follow the standard service account token format, including support for extended expiration when needed. 
This is especially useful for clusters that already rely on external identity or key management systems, 
allowing Kubernetes to integrate without duplicating key management inside the control plane.

The kube-apiserver is wired to discover public keys from the external signer, 
cache them, and validate tokens it did not sign itself, 
so existing RBAC and authentication flows continue to work as expected. 
Over the alpha and beta phases, the API and configuration for the external signer plugin, 
path validation, and OIDC discovery were hardened to handle real-world deployments and rotation patterns safely. 

With GA in v1.36, `ExternalServiceAccountTokenSigner` is now a fully supported option for platforms that 
centralize identity and signing, simplifying integration with external IAM systems and 
reducing the need to manage signing keys directly inside the control plane.

> This work was done as part of [KEP #740](https://kep.k8s.io/740) led by SIG Auth

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #740](https://kep.k8s.io/740) led by SIG Auth.
```

such as a container image or an artifact repository.

Now, developers and platform engineers can package application data, models, or static assets as OCI artifacts 
and deliver them to pods using the same registries and versioning workflows they already use for container images. 
This convergence of image and volume management simplifies CI/CD pipelines, 
reduces dependency on specialized storage backends for read-only content, 
and ensures that data remains portable and securely accessible across any environment.

This work was done as part of [KEP #4639](https://kep.k8s.io/4639) led by SIG Node.

## New features in Beta

This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now beta following the v1.36 release.

### Staleness mitigation for controllers

Staleness in Kubernetes controllers is a problem that affects many controllers and can subtly affect controller behavior. 
It is usually not until it is too late, when a controller in production has already taken incorrect action, 
that staleness is found to be an issue due to some underlying assumption made by the controller author. 

> This could lead to conflicting updates or data corruption when a new instance of the same controller took over.

Reviewer 9: This is more about reconcile loops within a controller, not different instances. Would recommend something more like

```
This could lead to conflicting updates or data corruption upon controller reconciliation during times of cache staleness
```

We are excited to announce that Kubernetes v1.36 includes new features that help mitigate controller staleness and 

> provide better observability of controller behavior. The kube-apiserver can now leverage the ControllerTerm 

Reviewer 9: This feature does not use the ControllerTerm or Lease objects and is based in the informers(kube-controller-manager/clients), not kube-apiserver. This part should probably be removed for clarity.

This ensures that only the active, authoritative controller can modify resources, providing higher 
reliability for mission-critical automation and preventing the race conditions that commonly plague 
distributed control loops during failover events.

This work was done as part of [KEP #5647](https://kep.k8s.io/5647) led by SIG API Machinery.

### IP/CIDR validation improvements

In Kubernetes v1.36, the `StrictIPCIDRValidation` feature for API IP and CIDR fields graduates to beta, 
tightening validation to catch malformed addresses and prefixes that previously slipped through. 
This helps prevent subtle configuration bugs where Services, Pods, NetworkPolicies, 
or other resources reference invalid IPs, which could otherwise lead to 
confusing runtime behavior or security surprises.

Controllers are updated to canonicalize IPs they write back into objects and to warn when they 
encounter bad values that were already stored, so clusters can gradually converge on clean, 
consistent data. With beta, `StrictIPCIDRValidation` is ready for wider use, 
giving operators more reliable guardrails around IP-related configuration 
as they evolve networks and policies over time.

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #4858](https://kep.k8s.io/4858) led by SIG Network

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
This work was done as a part of [KEP #4858](https://kep.k8s.io/4858) led by SIG Network.
```

and is enabled by default. The `~/.kube/kuberc` file allows users to store aliases, default flags, 
and other personal settings separately from `kubeconfig` files, which hold cluster endpoints and credentials. 
This separation prevents personal preferences from interfering with CI pipelines or shared `kubeconfig` files, 
while maintaining a consistent `kubectl` experience across different clusters and contexts.

Using the `kubectl.config.k8s.io/v1beta1` schema, teams can define aliases, set default options, 
and establish policies for credential plugins (including allowlists) to enforce safer authentication practices. 
Users can disable this functionality if needed by setting the `KUBECTL_KUBERC=false` or `KUBERC=off` environment variables.

This work was done as a part of [KEP #3104](https://kep.k8s.io/3104) led by SIG CLI, with the help from SIG Auth.

### Mutable Container resources when Job is suspended

In Kubernetes v1.36, the MutablePodResourcesForSuspendedJobs feature for Jobs graduates to beta, 
relaxing validation to allow updates to container CPU, memory, GPU, and extended resource requests 

> and limits whil a Job is suspended. This gives queue controllers and operators a safe hook to right‑size 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
and limits while a Job is suspended. This gives queue controllers and operators a safe hook to right‑size 
```

This work was done as a part of [KEP #5440](https://kep.k8s.io/5440) led by SIG Apps.

### Constrained impersonation

In Kubernetes v1.36, the `ConstrainedImpersonation` feature for user impersonation graduates to beta, 
tightening a historically all‑or‑nothing mechanism into something that can actually follow least‑privilege principles. 
When this feature is enabled, an impersonator must have two distinct sets of permissions: 
one to impersonate a given identity, and another to perform specific actions on that identity’s behalf. 
This prevents support tools, controllers, or node agents from using impersonation to gain broader access 
than they themselves are allowed, even if their impersonation RBAC is misconfigured. 
Existing impersonate rules keep working, but the API server prefers the new constrained checks first, 
making the transition incremental instead of a flag day. With beta in v1.36, `ConstrainedImpersonation` is tested, 
documented, and ready for wider adoption by platform teams that rely on impersonation for debugging, proxying, 
or node‑level controllers.

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #5284](https://kep.k8s.io/5284) led by SIG Auth

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
This work was done as a part of [KEP #5284](https://kep.k8s.io/5284) led by SIG Auth.
```

By integrating these features with [extended resource](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/#extended-resource) support, 
Kubernetes provides a robust production-ready alternative to the legacy device plugin system, 
enabling complex AI and HPC workloads to manage hardware with unprecedented precision and operational safety.

This work was done across several KEPs (including [#5004](https://kep.k8s.io/5004), [#4817](https://kep.k8s.io/4817), [#5055](https://kep.k8s.io/5055), [#5075](https://kep.k8s.io/5075), [#4815](https://kep.k8s.io/4815), and [#5007](https://kep.k8s.io/issues/5007)) led by SIG Scheduling and SIG Node.

### Statusz for Kubernetes Components

In Kubernetes v1.36, the `ComponentStatusz` feature for core Kubernetes components graduates to beta, 
standardizing a `/statusz` endpoint that surfaces real‑time build and version details for each component. 
This low‑overhead z‑page exposes information like start time, uptime, Go version, binary version, 
emulation version, and minimum compatibility version, so operators and developers can quickly see exactly 
what is running without digging through logs or configs. 

> The endpoint offers a human‑readable text view by default, plus a versioned structured API (config.k8s.io/Statusz) 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
The endpoint offers a human‑readable text view by default, plus a versioned structured API (`config.k8s.io/Statusz`) 
```

for programmatic access in JSON, YAML, or CBOR via explicit content negotiation. 
Access is restricted to the `system:monitoring` group, keeping it aligned with existing protections on 
health and metrics endpoints and avoiding exposure of sensitive data. 

With beta, `ComponentStatusz` is enabled by default across all core control‑plane components and node agents, 
backed by unit, integration, and end‑to‑end tests so it can be safely used in production for 
observability and debugging workflows.

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #4827](https://kep.k8s.io/4827) led by SIG Instrumentation

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
This work was done as a part of [KEP #4827](https://kep.k8s.io/4827) led by SIG Instrumentation.
```

### Flagz for Kubernetes Components 

In Kubernetes v1.36, the `ComponentFlagz` feature for core Kubernetes components graduates to beta, 
standardizing a `/flagz` endpoint that exposes the effective command‑line flags each component was started with. 
This gives cluster operators and developers real‑time, in‑cluster visibility into component configuration, 
making it much easier to debug unexpected behavior or verify that a flag rollout actually took effect after a restart. 

The endpoint supports both a human‑readable text view and a versioned structured API (initially `config.k8s.io/v1alpha1`), 
so you can either curl it during an incident or wire it into automated tooling once you are ready. 
Access is restricted to the `system:monitoring` group and sensitive values can be redacted, 
keeping configuration insight aligned with existing security practices around health and status endpoints. 

With beta, `ComponentFlagz` is now enabled by default and implemented across all core control‑plane components 
and node agents, backed by unit, integration, and end‑to‑end tests to ensure the endpoint is reliable in production clusters.

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #4828](https://kep.k8s.io/4828) led by SIG Instrumentation

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
This work was done as a part of [KEP #4828](https://kep.k8s.io/4828) led by SIG Instrumentation.
```

The feature relies on peer-aggregated discovery, so apiservers share information about which resources and versions they expose,
then use that data to transparently reroute requests when needed. New metrics on rerouted traffic and proxy behavior 
help operators understand how often requests are forwarded and to which peers. 
Together, these changes make it easier to run highly available, mixed-version API control planes in production 
while performing multi-step or partial control-plane upgrades.

This work was done as a part of [KEP #4020](https://kep.k8s.io/4020) led by SIG API Machinery

### Support memory qos with cgroups v2

Kubernetes now enhances MemoryQoS on cgroup v2 nodes with smarter, tiered memory protection that better aligns kernel 
controls with pod requests and limits, reducing interference and thrashing for workloads sharing the same node. 
This iteration also refines how kubelet programs memory.high and memory.min, adds metrics and safeguards to avoid livelocks, 
and introduces configuration options so cluster operators can tune memory protection behavior for their environments.

> This work was done as part of [KEP #2570](https://kep.k8s.io/2570) led by SIG Node

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
This work was done as part of [KEP #2570](https://kep.k8s.io/2570) led by SIG Node.
```

Author: Thanks again! I have fixed.

## New features in Alpha

This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now alpha following the v1.36 release.

### HPA Scale to Zero for Custom Metrics

> Since now, the Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) required a minimum of at least one replica to remain active, 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Until now, the Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) required a minimum of at least one replica to remain active, 
```

as it could only calculate scaling needs based on metrics (like CPU or Memory) from running pods. 
Kubernetes v1.36 continues the development of the HPA Scale to Zero feature (disabled by default) in Alpha, 
allowing workloads to scale down to zero replicas specifically when using Object or External metrics.

Now, users can experiment with significantly reducing infrastructure costs by completely idling heavy workloads when 
no work is pending. While the feature remains behind the HPAScaleToZero feature gate, 
it enables the HPA to stay active even with zero running pods, 
automatically scaling the deployment back up as soon as the external metric (e.g., queue length) 
indicates that new tasks have arrived.

This work was done as part of [KEP #2021](https://kep.k8s.io/2021) led by SIG Autoscaling.

### DRA features in Alpha

Historically, the Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) framework lacked seamless integration with high-level controllers and
provided limited visibility into device-specific metadata or availability. 

> Kubernetes v1.36 introduces a wave of DRA enhancements in Alpha, including native ResourceClaim support for workloads, 

Reviewer 12: lines 453-454:

WAS ResourceClaims do not automatically manage hardware claims. The main idea of this feature is to enable DRA for podgroups but we do not yet have any design for Deployments/StatefulSets.

Reviewer 12: imo I would remove this one or we could add an alpha section for WAS in general.

which allows Deployments and StatefulSets to manage hardware claims automatically, 

> and DRA Native Resources to simplify how drivers define hardware classes.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
and DRA Native Resources to provide the flexibility of DRA to cpu management.
```

I don't really know what "simplify how drivers define hardware classes" means. I take DRA native resources to me that we can now use dra-cpu-driver to manage CPU instead of Kubelet cpu manager.

Reviewer 13: yeah, Makes sense. The wording is bit unclear.  I'm wondering if keeping it CPU specific might be a bit limiting. Since, DRA is meant to cover broader set of resources. 

Maybe we can keep it bit more general, something like
"and DRA Native Resources, which improve how hardware resources can be defined and managed more flexibly within Kubernetes"

To prioritize the safety and security of the ecosystem, Kubernetes SIG Network and the Security Response Committee have 
retired Ingress NGINX on March 24, 2026.
Since that date, there have been no further releases, no bugfixes, and no updates to resolve any security vulnerabilities discovered. Existing deployments of
Ingress NGINX will continue to function, and installation artifacts like Helm charts and container images will remain available. 

For full details, see the [official retirement announcement](/blog/2025/11/11/ingress-nginx-retirement/).

### Faster SELinux labelling for volumes (GA) {#volume-selinux-labelling}

Kubernetes v1.36 makes the SELinux volume mounting improvement generally available. This change replaced recursive file 
relabeling with `mount -o context=XYZ` option, applying the correct SELinux label to the entire volume at mount time. 
It brings more consistent performance and reduces Pod startup delays on SELinux-enforcing systems.

This feature was introduced as beta in v1.28 for `ReadWriteOncePod` volumes. In v1.32, it gained metrics and an opt-out 
option (`securityContext.seLinuxChangePolicy: Recursive`) to help catch conflicts. Now in v1.36, 

> it reaches stable and defaults to all volumes, with Pods or CSIDrivers opting in via `spec.SELinuxMount`. 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
it reaches Stable and defaults to all volumes, with Pods or CSIDrivers opting in via `spec.SELinuxMount`. 
```

The gitRepo volume type has been deprecated since v1.11. Starting Kubernetes v1.36, the `gitRepo` volume plugin is 
permanently disabled and cannot be turned back on. This change protects clusters from a critical security issue where 
using `gitRepo` could let an attacker run code as root on the node. 

Although `gitRepo` has been deprecated for years and better alternatives have been recommended, 
it was still technically possible to use it in previous releases.
From v1.36 onward, that path is closed for good, so any existing workloads depending on `gitRepo` will need to migrate to
supported approaches such as init containers or external git-sync style tools.

For more details on this enhancement, refer to [KEP-5040: Remove gitRepo volume driver](https://kep.k8s.io/5040)

## Release notes

Check out the full details of the Kubernetes v1.36 release in our [release notes](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/CHANGELOG/CHANGELOG-1.36.md).

## Availability

Kubernetes v1.36 is available for download on [GitHub](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/releases/tag/v1.36.0) or on the [Kubernetes download page](https://kubernetes.io/releases/download/).

> To get started with Kubernetes, check out these interactive tutorials or run local Kubernetes clusters using [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/). 

Reviewer 11: We no longer have interactive tutorials. 

_See https://kubernetes.io/blog/2023/02/14/kubernetes-katacoda-tutorials-stop-from-2023-0_3-31/

> You can also easily install v1.34 using kubeadm.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
You can also easily install v1.36 using kubeadm.
```

**April 2026**
- KCD - [Kubernetes Community Days: Guadalajara](https://community.cncf.io/events/details/cncf-kcd-guadalajara-presents-kcd-guadalajara-2026/cohost-kcd-guadalajara/): April 18, 2026 | Guadalajara, Mexico

**May 2026**
- KCD - [Kubernetes Community Days: Toronto](https://community.cncf.io/events/details/cncf-kcd-toronto-presents-kcd-toronto-2026/): May 13, 2026 | Toronto, Canada
- KCD - [Kubernetes Community Days: Texas](https://community.cncf.io/events/details/cncf-kcd-texas-presents-kcd-texas-2026/cohost-kcd-texas/): May 15, 2026 | Austin, USA
- KCD - [Kubernetes Community Days: Istanbul](https://community.cncf.io/events/details/cncf-kcd-istanbul-presents-kcd-istanbul-2026/): May 15, 2026 | Istanbul, Turkey
- KCD - [Kubernetes Community Days: Helsinki](https://community.cncf.io/events/details/cncf-kcd-helsinki-presents-kubernetes-community-days-helsinki-2026/): May 20, 2026 | Helsinki, Finland
- KCD - [Kubernetes Community Days: Czech & Slovak](https://community.cncf.io/events/details/cncf-kcd-czech-slovak-presents-kcd-czech-amp-slovak-prague-2026/): May 21, 2026 | Prague, Czechia
 
**June 2026**

> - KCD - [Kubernetes Community Days: New York](https://community.cncf.io/events/details/cncf-kcd-new-york-presents-kcd-new-york-2026/): June 10, 2025 | New York, USA

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
- KCD - [Kubernetes Community Days: New York](https://community.cncf.io/events/details/cncf-kcd-new-york-presents-kcd-new-york-2026/): June 10, 2026 | New York, USA
```

- [KubeCon + CloudNativeCon North America 2026](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-north-america/): Nov 9-12, 2026 | Salt Lake, USA

You can find the latest event details [here](https://community.cncf.io/events/#/list).

## Upcoming Release Webinar

Join members of the Kubernetes v1.36 Release Team on **Wednesday, May 20th 2026 at 4:00 PM (UTC)** to learn about the release highlights
of this release. For more information and registration, visit the [event page](https://community.cncf.io/events/details/cncf-cncf-online-programs-presents-cloud-native-live-kubernetes-v136-release/) on the CNCF Online Programs site.

## Get Involved

The simplest way to get involved with Kubernetes is by joining one of the many [Special Interest Groups](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-list.md) (SIGs) that align with your interests. 
Have something you’d like to broadcast to the Kubernetes community? Share your voice at our weekly [community meeting](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/communication), 
and through the channels below. Thank you for your continued feedback and support.

> - Follow us on Bluesky [@Kubernetesio](https://bsky.app/profile/kubernetes.io) for the latest updates

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
- Follow us on Bluesky [@kubernetes.io](https://bsky.app/profile/kubernetes.io) for the latest updates
```

- Join the community discussion on [Discuss](https://discuss.kubernetes.io/)

> - Join the community on [Slack](http://slack.k8s.io/)

Reviewer 11: Duplicate line.
```suggestion
```

This work was done as part of [KEP #4876](https://kep.k8s.io/4876) led by SIG Storage.

### Speed up recursive SELinux label change

In Kubernetes v1.36, the `SELinuxMountReadWriteOncePod` and `SELinuxChangePolicy` features graduate to GA, 
completing a multi‑release effort to dramatically speed up SELinux volume relabeling for pods. 
Instead of recursively changing the SELinux label of every file on a volume at container start, 
Kubernetes can now mount volumes directly with the correct label when certain access modes are used. 
This significantly reduces container startup time for workloads with large volumes, cutting down on 
long cold starts and noisy-node behavior in SELinux‑enforcing environments. 

The new `SELinuxChangePolicy` option lets you opt pods into this optimized behavior safely, 
with controllers emitting warnings when they detect configurations that will stop working in future releases. 
With these features stable, clusters running with SELinux enabled get a more predictable, 
performant startup path while setting the stage for stricter, 
safer SELinux enforcement in Kubernetes 1.37 and beyond.

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #1710](http://kep.k8s.io/1710) led by SIG Node and SIG Storage. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This work was done as a part of [KEP #1710](https://kep.k8s.io/1710) led by SIG Node and SIG Storage. 
```

For consumers of Kubernetes API Go types, this change reduces technical debt and 
prevents accidental misuse with standard protobuf libraries.

This work was done as part of [KEP #5589](https://kep.k8s.io/5589) led by SIG API Machinery.

### Node log query

Previously, Kubernetes required cluster administrators to log into nodes via SSH or implement a 
client-side reader for debugging issues pertaining to control-plane or worker nodes. 
While certain issues still require direct node access, issues with the kube-proxy or kubelet 
can be diagnosed by inspecting their logs. Node logs offer cluster administrators 
a method to view these logs using the kubelet API and kubectl plugin 
to simplify troubleshooting without logging into nodes, similar to debugging issues 
related to a pod or container. This method is operating system agnostic and 
requires the services or nodes to log to `/var/log`. 

As this feature reaches GA in Kubernetes 1.36 after thorough performance validation on production workloads, 
it is enabled by default on the kubelet through the `NodeLogQuery` feature gate. 
In addition, the `enableSystemLogQuery` kubelet configuration option must also be enabled. 

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #2258](http://kep.k8s.io/2258) led by SIG Windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This work was done as a part of [KEP #2258](https://kep.k8s.io/2258) led by SIG Windows.
```

This transition moves DRA beyond basic allocation by graduating [partitionable devices](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/#partitionable-devices) and [consumable capacity](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/#consumable-capacity), allowing for more granular sharing of hardware like GPUs, 
while [device taints and tolerations](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/#device-taints-and-tolerations) ensure that specialized resources are only utilized by the appropriate workloads.

Now, users benefit from a much more reliable and observable resource lifecycle through [ResourceClaim device status](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/#resourceclaim-device-status) 
and the ability to ensure device attachment before Pod scheduling. 
By integrating these features with [extended resource](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/#extended-resource) support, 
Kubernetes provides a robust production-ready alternative to the legacy device plugin system, 
enabling complex AI and HPC workloads to manage hardware with unprecedented precision and operational safety.

> This work was done across several KEPs (including [#5004](https://kep.k8s.io/5004), [#4817](https://kep.k8s.io/4817), [#5055](https://kep.k8s.io/5055), [#5075](https://kep.k8s.io/5075), [#4815](https://kep.k8s.io/5075), and [#5007](https://kep.k8s.io/issues/5007)) led by SIG Scheduling and SIG Node.

Reviewer: Wrong link
```suggestion
This work was done across several KEPs (including [#5004](https://kep.k8s.io/5004), [#4817](https://kep.k8s.io/4817), [#5055](https://kep.k8s.io/5055), [#5075](https://kep.k8s.io/5075), [#4815](https://kep.k8s.io/4815), and [#5007](https://kep.k8s.io/issues/5007)) led by SIG Scheduling and SIG Node.
```

Pod author Developers have that responsibility whether they are writing a Deployment, StatefulSet, 
DaemonSet or even a custom resource that includes a Pod template. Being careless with these settings can lead to 
a range of problems when Pods share volumes.

For more details on this enhancement, refer to  [KEP-1710: Speed up recursive SELinux label change](https://kep.k8s.io/1710)

## Graduations, deprecations, and removals in v1.36

### Graduations to stable

This lists all the features that graduated to stable (also known as general availability). 
For a full list of updates including new features and graduations from alpha to beta, see the release notes.

This release includes a total of 18 enhancements promoted to stable:

- [Support User Namespaces in pods](https://kep.k8s.io/127)
- [API for external signing of Service Account tokens](https://kep.k8s.io/740)
- [Speed up recursive SELinux label change](https://kep.k8s.io/1710)
- [Portworx file in-tree to CSI driver migration](https://kep.k8s.io/2589)
- [Fine grained Kubelet API authorization](https://kep.k8s.io/2862)

> - [Mutating Admission Policies](https://gkep.k8s.io/3962)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Mutating Admission Policies](https://kep.k8s.io/3962)
```

- [add ProcMount option](https://kep.k8s.io/4265)
- [DRA: Extend PodResources to include resources from Dynamic Resource Allocation](https://kep.k8s.io/3695)
- [VolumeSource: OCI Artifact and/or Image](https://kep.k8s.io/4639)
- [Split L3 Cache Topology Awareness in CPU Manager](https://kep.k8s.io/5109)
- [DRA: AdminAccess for ResourceClaims and ResourceClaimTemplates](https://kep.k8s.io/5018)
- [Remove gogo protobuf dependency for Kubernetes API types](https://kep.k8s.io/5589)
- [CSI driver opt-in for service account tokens via secrets field](https://kep.k8s.io/5538)

## Deprecations removals, and community updates

As Kubernetes develops and matures, features may be deprecated, removed, or replaced with better ones to improve the 
project's overall health. See the Kubernetes deprecation and removal policy for more details on this process. 
Kubernetes v1.36 includes a couple of deprecations.

### Deprecate service.spec.externalIPs

The `externalIPs` field in Service `spec` is deprecated, which means you no longer have a way to route arbitrary externalIPs 
to your Services. This field has been a known security headache for years, enabling man-in-the-middle attacks on your 

> cluster traffic, as documented in [CVE-2020-8554](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/970760). 

Reviewer: Broken link, I believe this is the correct one

```suggestion
cluster traffic, as documented in [CVE-2020-8554](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/97076). 
```

For more details on this enhancement, refer to [KEP-5707: Deprecate service.spec.externalIPs](https://kep.k8s.io/5707)

### Remove gitRepo volume driver

The gitRepo volume type has been deprecated since v1.11. Starting Kubernetes v1.36, the `gitRepo` volume plugin is 
permanently disabled and cannot be turned back on. This change protects clusters from a critical security issue where 
using `gitRepo` could let an attacker run code as root on the node. 

Although `gitRepo` has been deprecated for years and better alternatives have been recommended, 
it was still technically possible to use it in previous releases.
From v1.36 onward, that path is closed for good, so any existing workloads depending on `gitRepo` will need to migrate to
supported approaches such as init containers or external git-sync style tools.

For more details on this enhancement, refer to [KEP-5040: Remove gitRepo volume driver](https://kep.k8s.io/5040)

## Release notes

Check out the full details of the Kubernetes v1.36 release in our [release notes](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/CHANGELOG/CHANGELOG-1.36.md).

## Availability

> Kubernetes v1.36 is available for download on [GitHub](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/releases/tag/v1.36.0) or on the [Kubernetes download page](http://releases/download/).

Reviewer: Broken link

```suggestion
Kubernetes v1.36 is available for download on [GitHub](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/releases/tag/v1.36.0) or on the [Kubernetes download page](https://kubernetes.io/releases/download/).
```

You can find the latest event details [here](https://community.cncf.io/events/#/list).

## Upcoming Release Webinar

Join members of the Kubernetes v1.36 Release Team on 20 May 2026 at 9 am PT to learn about the release highlights
of this release. For more information and registration, visit the event page on the CNCF Online Programs site.

## Get Involved

The simplest way to get involved with Kubernetes is by joining one of the many [Special Interest Groups](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-list.md) (SIGs) that align with your interests. 
Have something you’d like to broadcast to the Kubernetes community? Share your voice at our weekly [community meeting](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/communication), 
and through the channels below. Thank you for your continued feedback and support.

- Follow us on Bluesky [@Kubernetesio](https://bsky.app/profile/kubernetes.io) for the latest updates
- Join the community discussion on [Discuss](https://discuss.kubernetes.io/)
- Join the community on [Slack](http://slack.k8s.io/)

> - Post questions (or answer questions) on [Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/kubernetes)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Join the community on [Slack](https://slack.k8s.io/)
- Post questions (or answer questions) on [Stack Overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/kubernetes)
```

Similar to previous releases, the release of Kubernetes v1.36 introduces new stable, beta, and alpha features. The consistent delivery of high-quality releases underscores the strength of our development cycle and the vibrant support from our community.

This release consists of 70 enhancements. Of those enhancements, 18 have graduated to Stable, 25 are entering Beta, and 25 have graduated to Alpha.

There are also some [deprecations and removals](#deprecations-removals-and-community-updates) in this release; make sure to read about those.

## Release theme and logo

\<TODO RELEASE THEME AND LOGO\>

## Spotlight on key updates

Kubernetes v1.36 is packed with new features and improvements. Here are a 
few select updates the Release Team would like to highlight!

### Stable: Fine-grained API authorization

On behalf of Kubernetes SIG Auth and SIG Node, we are pleased to announce the
graduation of fine-grained `kubelet` API authorization to General Availability
(GA) in Kubernetes v1.36!

The `KubeletFineGrainedAuthz` feature gate was introduced as an opt-in alpha feature
in Kubernetes v1.32, then graduated to beta (enabled by default) in v1.33. 

> Now, the feature is generally available, and the feature gate is locked to enable. 

Reviewer 3: nit: avoid 'enable' repetition
```suggestion
Now, the feature is generally available.
```

This feature enables more precise, least-privilege access control over the `kubelet`'s 
HTTPS API replacing the need to grant the overly broad nodes/proxy permission for 
common monitoring and observability use cases.

​​This work was done as a part of [KEP #2862](https://kep.k8s.io/2862) led by SIG Auth and SIG Node.

### Beta: Resource health status

Previously, Kubernetes lacked a native way to report the health of allocated devices, 
making it difficult to diagnose Pod crashes caused by hardware failures. 
Building on the initial alpha release in v1.31 which focused on Device Plugins, 
Kubernetes v1.36 expands this feature to support Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA), 

> introducing the `allocatedResourcesStatus` field to provide a unified health 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kubernetes v1.36 expands this feature by 
introducing the `allocatedResourcesStatus` field within the `.status` for each Pod, 
which provides a unified health 
```

reporting mechanism for all specialized hardware.

> Now, users can use `kubectl describe pod` to determine if a container's crash loop is 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Users can now run `kubectl describe pod` to determine if a container's crash loop is 
```

Users can now run `kubectl describe pod` to determine if a container's crash loop is 
due to an `Unhealthy` or `Unknown` device status, regardless of whether the hardware was 
provisioned via traditional plugins or the newer DRA framework. 
This enhanced visibility allows administrators and automated controllers to 
quickly identify faulty hardware and streamline the recovery of high-performance workloads.

This work was done as part of [KEP #4680](https://kep.k8s.io/4680) led by SIG Node.

### Alpha: Workload Aware Scheduling (WAS) features

Previously, the Kubernetes scheduler and job controllers managed pods as independent units, 
often leading to fragmented scheduling or resource waste for complex, distributed workloads. 
Kubernetes v1.36 introduces a comprehensive suite of Workload Aware Scheduling (WAS) features in Alpha, 
natively integrating the Job controller with a new Workload API and a decoupled PodGroup API 
to treat related pods as a single logical entity.

> Kubernetes v1.35 already supported [gang scheduling](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/gang-scheduling/) by requiring 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kubernetes v1.35 already supported [gang scheduling](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/gang-scheduling/) by requiring 
```

while the new work in gang scheduling in v1.36 includes a new 

> PodGroup scheduling cycle, which atomically evaluates the entire pod group.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kubernetes v1.35 already supported [gang scheduling](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/gang-scheduling/) by requiring 
a minimum number of pods to be schedulable before any were bound to nodes. 
v1.36 goes further with a new PodGroup scheduling cycle that evaluates the entire group atomically, 
either all pods in the group are bound together, or none are.
```

This work was done across several KEPs (including [#4671](https://kep.k8s.io/4671), [#5547](https://kep.k8s.io/5547), [#5832](https://kep.k8s.io/5832), [#5732](https://kep.k8s.io/5732), and [#5710](https://kep.k8s.io/5710)) led by SIG Scheduling and SIG Apps.

## Features graduating to Stable

> This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now stable following the v1.36 release.

Reviewer 3: Looking at the latest announcements, we've been styling this in italics
```suggestion
_This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now stable following the v1.36 release._
```

### Volume Group Snapshots

After several cycles in beta, Volume Group Snapshots reach General Availability (GA) in Kubernetes v1.36. 
This feature allows you to take crash-consistent snapshots across 
multiple PersistentVolumeClaims simultaneously. 
By ensuring that data and logs across different volumes remain synchronized, 

> this enhancement provides a robust solution for protecting complex, multi-volume workloads. 

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure this feature ensures synchronization or protection, I would stick to the summary provided by the SIG [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/discussions/2958#discussioncomment-15992196)

With this release, the API version promotes to v1 and the `CSIVolumeGroupSnapshot` 
feature gate is now locked to enabled.

This work was done as part of [KEP #3476](https://kep.k8s.io/3476) led by SIG Storage.

> ### CSI driver opt-in for service account tokens via secrets field

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### CSI driver opt-in for Service Account tokens via `secrets` field
```

> Security for storage integrations reaches a higher standard in Kubernetes v1.36 with 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Security for storage integrations is improved in Kubernetes v1.36 with 
```

> the graduation of CSI Service Account Token Secret Redaction to Stable. 

Reviewer 3: is this feature name right? I couldn't find it anywhere else

> This improvement eliminates a long-standing security risk where sensitive service account tokens, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This feature eliminates a long-standing security risk where sensitive Service Account tokens, 
```

intended only for the storage driver, were inadvertently exposed within 
the Secret field of CSI volume objects, making them visible to unauthorized users with 
basic read access to the API.

Kubernetes now allows CSI drivers to opt in to receive these short-lived tokens through 
the dedicated `secrets` field. Driver authors can enable this behavior by updating the 
`CSIDriver` object. This approach prevents token leakage in driver logs and protects workload identities.

This work was done as part of [KEP #5538](https://kep.k8s.io/5538) led by SIG Storage.

> ### Mutable CSINode Allocatable Property

Reviewer 3: Using feature name suggested by the SIG in the Highlights discussion: https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/discussions/2958#discussioncomment-15992196
```suggestion
### Mutable volume attach limits
```

In Kubernetes v1.36, the Mutable `CSINode` Allocatable feature graduates to stable. 
This enhancement resolves a limitation where node storage resource limits, 
such as the maximum number of volumes a node can attach, 

> were static and set only during the initial registration of the Container Storage Interface (CSI) driver.

Reviewer 3: I suggest replacing with this (simpler) definition used in the enhancement's feature blog: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/54021/changes#diff-1880fefad40ea49d3246be04614e508ce7b04dae42ea84b8f92873e7af083579R14-R17
```suggestion
This enhancement allows [Container Storage Interface (CSI)](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/introduction.html) drivers to
dynamically update the reported maximum number of volumes that a node can handle.
```

effects before they lead to application performance degradation or node instability.

This work was done as part of [KEP #4205](https://kep.k8s.io/4205) led by SIG Node.

### VolumeSource: OCI Artifact and/or Image

The distribution of container data becomes more flexible in Kubernetes v1.36 as OCI Volume Sources graduate to Stable. 
This feature moves beyond the traditional requirement of mounting volumes from external storage providers 
or config maps by allowing the kubelet to pull and mount content directly from any OCI-compliant registry, 
such as a container image or an artifact repository.

Now, developers and platform engineers can package application data, models, or static assets as OCI artifacts 
and deliver them to pods using the same registries and versioning workflows they already use for container images. 
This convergence of image and volume management simplifies CI/CD pipelines, 
reduces dependency on specialized storage backends for read-only content, 
and ensures that data remains portable and securely accessible across any environment.

This work was done as part of [KEP #4639](https://kep.k8s.io/4639) led by SIG Node.

## New features in Beta

> This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now beta following the v1.36 release.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
_This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now beta following the v1.36 release._
```

and node agents, backed by unit, integration, and end‑to‑end tests to ensure the endpoint is reliable in production clusters.

This work was done as a part of [KEP #4828](https://kep.k8s.io/4828) led by SIG Instrumentation

### Mixed Version Proxy (aka Unknown Version Interoperability Proxy)

In Kubernetes v1.36, the Mixed Version Proxy feature graduates to beta, building on its alpha introduction in v1.28 
to provide safer control-plane upgrades for mixed-version clusters. Each API request can now be routed to the apiserver 
instance that serves the requested group, version, and resource, reducing 404s and failures due to version skew. 

The feature relies on peer-aggregated discovery, so apiservers share information about which resources and versions they expose,
then use that data to transparently reroute requests when needed. New metrics on rerouted traffic and proxy behavior 
help operators understand how often requests are forwarded and to which peers. 
Together, these changes make it easier to run highly available, mixed-version API control planes in production 
while performing multi-step or partial control-plane upgrades.

> This work was done as a part of [KEP #4020](https://kep.k8s.io/4020) led by SIG API-Machinery

Reviewer 6: @chadmcrowell friendly ping.

```suggestion
This work was done as a part of [KEP #4020](https://kep.k8s.io/4020) led by SIG API Machinery
```

### Support memory qos with cgroups v2

Kubernetes now enhances MemoryQoS on cgroup v2 nodes with smarter, tiered memory protection that better aligns kernel 
controls with pod requests and limits, reducing interference and thrashing for workloads sharing the same node. 
This iteration also refines how kubelet programs memory.high and memory.min, adds metrics and safeguards to avoid livelocks, 
and introduces configuration options so cluster operators can tune memory protection behavior for their environments.

This work was done as part of [KEP #2570](https://kep.k8s.io/2570) led by SIG Node

## New features in Alpha

> This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now alpha following the v1.36 release.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
_This is a selection of some of the improvements that are now alpha following the v1.36 release._
```

### Staleness mitigation for controllers

Staleness in Kubernetes controllers is a problem that affects many controllers and can subtly affect controller behavior. 
It is usually not until it is too late, when a controller in production has already taken incorrect action, 
that staleness is found to be an issue due to some underlying assumption made by the controller author. 
This could lead to conflicting updates or data corruption when a new instance of the same controller took over.

We are excited to announce that Kubernetes v1.36 includes new features that help mitigate controller staleness and 
provide better observability of controller behavior. The kube-apiserver can now leverage the ControllerTerm 
in the Lease object to verify that a controller is the current valid leader before committing changes. 
This ensures that only the active, authoritative controller can modify resources, providing higher 
reliability for mission-critical automation and preventing the race conditions that commonly plague 
distributed control loops during failover events.

This work was done as part of [KEP #5647](https://kep.k8s.io/5647) led by SIG API Machinery.

> ### HPA Scale to Zero for Custom Metrics

Reviewer 10: Adrian from sig-autoscaling here: 
I've noticed a lot of confusion online about this feature, a few people think that this is being enabled by default in 1.36, which is not the case. 
Does it make sense to be super explicit that it's off-by-default currently to try counter the misinformation?

> This work was done as part of [KEP #5647](https://kep.k8s.io/5647) led by SIG API Machinery.

Reviewer 6: Is this KEP's status alpha or beta? I see the PRR says beta, but the blog says it's in alpha?

Reviewer 9: It was recently bumped it to beta since all feature gates it was based on are beta. Sorry for the confusion on that!

Historically, the Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) framework lacked seamless integration with high-level controllers and
provided limited visibility into device-specific metadata or availability. 
Kubernetes v1.36 introduces a wave of DRA enhancements in Alpha, including native ResourceClaim support for workloads, 
which allows Deployments and StatefulSets to manage hardware claims automatically, 
and DRA Native Resources to simplify how drivers define hardware classes.

Now, users can leverage the Downward API to expose complex resource attributes directly to containers and 
benefit from improved Resource Availability Visibility for more predictable scheduling. These updates, 
combined with support for List Types in attributes, transform DRA from a low-level primitive into a robust system 
capable of handling the sophisticated networking and compute requirements of modern AI and 
high-performance computing (HPC) stacks.

This work was done across several KEPs (including [#5729](https://kep.k8s.io/5729), [#5304](https://kep.k8s.io/5304), [#5517](https://kep.k8s.io/5517), [#5677](https://kep.k8s.io/5677), and [#5491](https://kep.k8s.io/5491)) led by SIG Scheduling and SIG Node.

> ### Native Histogram Support for Kubernetes Metrics

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Native histogram support for Kubernetes metrics
```

High-resolution monitoring reaches a new milestone in Kubernetes v1.36 with the introduction of Native Histogram support 
in Alpha. While classical Prometheus histograms relied on static, pre-defined buckets that often forced a compromise 
between data accuracy and memory usage, this update allows the control plane to export sparse histograms that 
dynamically adjust their resolution based on real-time data.

Now, cluster operators can capture precise latency distributions for the kube-apiserver and other core components without 
the overhead of manual bucket management. This architectural shift ensures more reliable SLIs and SLOs, 
providing high-fidelity heatmaps that remain accurate even during the most unpredictable workload spikes.

This work was done as part of [KEP #5808](https://kep.k8s.io/5808) led by SIG Instrumentation.

> ### Manifest Based Admission Control Config

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Manifest based admission control config
```

Managing admission controllers moves toward a more declarative and consistent model in Kubernetes v1.36 with the 
introduction of Manifest-based Admission Control Configuration in Alpha. 
This change addresses the long-standing challenge of configuring admission plugins through disparate command-line 
flags or separate, complex config files by allowing administrators to define the desired state of admission control 
directly through a structured manifest.

Now, cluster operators can manage admission plugin settings with the same versioned, declarative workflows used for 
other Kubernetes objects, significantly reducing the risk of configuration drift and manual errors during cluster upgrades. 
By centralizing these configurations into a unified manifest, the kube-apiserver becomes easier to audit and automate, 
paving the way for more secure and reproducible cluster deployments.

This work was done as part of [KEP #5793](https://kep.k8s.io/5793) led by SIG API Machinery.

> ### CRI List Streaming

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### CRI list streaming
```

Now, instead of waiting for a single, massive response containing all container or image data, the kubelet can process results 
incrementally as they are streamed. This shift significantly reduces the peak memory footprint of the kubelet and improves 
responsiveness on high-density nodes, ensuring that cluster management remains fluid even as the number of 
containers per node continues to grow.

This work was done as part of [KEP #5825](https://kep.k8s.io/5825) led by SIG Node.

## Other notable changes

### Ingress NGINX retirement

To prioritize the safety and security of the ecosystem, Kubernetes SIG Network and the Security Response Committee have 
retired Ingress NGINX on March 24, 2026.
Since that date, there have been no further releases, no bugfixes, and no updates to resolve any security vulnerabilities discovered. Existing deployments of
Ingress NGINX will continue to function, and installation artifacts like Helm charts and container images will remain available. 

For full details, see the [official retirement announcement](/blog/2025/11/11/ingress-nginx-retirement/).

> ### Faster SELinux labelling for volumes (GA) {#volume-selinux-labelling}

Reviewer 3: This one is already mentioned under `### Speed up recursive SELinux label change` in the `## Features graduating to Stable` section. If we want to make it a notable change, I would consolidate both sections to avoid repetition.

- [Support PSI based on cgroupv2](https://kep.k8s.io/4205)
- [add ProcMount option](https://kep.k8s.io/4265)
- [DRA: Extend PodResources to include resources from Dynamic Resource Allocation](https://kep.k8s.io/3695)
- [VolumeSource: OCI Artifact and/or Image](https://kep.k8s.io/4639)
- [Split L3 Cache Topology Awareness in CPU Manager](https://kep.k8s.io/5109)
- [DRA: AdminAccess for ResourceClaims and ResourceClaimTemplates](https://kep.k8s.io/5018)
- [Remove gogo protobuf dependency for Kubernetes API types](https://kep.k8s.io/5589)
- [CSI driver opt-in for service account tokens via secrets field](https://kep.k8s.io/5538)

## Deprecations removals, and community updates

As Kubernetes develops and matures, features may be deprecated, removed, or replaced with better ones to improve the 
project's overall health. See the Kubernetes deprecation and removal policy for more details on this process. 
Kubernetes v1.36 includes a couple of deprecations.

### Deprecate service.spec.externalIPs

The `externalIPs` field in Service `spec` is deprecated, which means you no longer have a way to route arbitrary externalIPs 

> to your Services. This field has been a known security headache for years, enabling man-in-the-middle attacks on your 

Reviewer 10: Adrian from sig-network here:
Does it makes sense to be clear that deprecation means that the feature will continue to work, but only throw a warning?

I see that a little bit down (on line 593) it explains this, but, if someone were to read the highlighted lines only, they may assume that externalIPs is going away in 1.36, which is not the case.

Reviewer 14: I agree with you here. If I were to read just these two lines, I would assume that it no longer works.

Reviewer 13: Yeah, I got the same impression from these lines that this feature is no longer available.

- [KubeCon + CloudNativeCon India 2026: June 18-19, 2026](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-india/) | Mumbai, India

**July 2026**
- [KubeCon + CloudNativeCon Japan 2026: July 29-30, 2026](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-japan/) | Yokohama, Japan

**September 2026**
- [KubeCon + CloudNativeCon China 2026: September 8-9, 2026](https://www.lfopensource.cn/kubecon-cloudnativecon-openinfra-summit-pytorch-conference-china/) | Shanghai, China

**October 2026**
- KCD - [Kubernetes Community Days: UK: Oct 19, 2026](https://community.cncf.io/events/details/cncf-kcd-uk-presents-kubernetes-community-days-uk-edinburgh-2026/) | Edinburgh, UK

**November 2026**
- KCD - [Kubernetes Community Days: Porto](https://community.cncf.io/events/details/cncf-kcd-porto-presents-kcd-porto-2026-collab-with-devops-days-portugal/): Nov 19, 2026 | Porto, Portugal
- [KubeCon + CloudNativeCon North America 2026](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-north-america/): Nov 9-12, 2026 | Salt Lake, USA

You can find the latest event details [here](https://community.cncf.io/events/#/list).

## Upcoming Release Webinar

> Join members of the Kubernetes v1.36 Release Team on 20 May 2026 at 9 am PT to learn about the release highlights

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Join members of the Kubernetes v1.36 Release Team on **Wednesday, May 20th 2026 at 4:00 PM (UTC)** to learn about the release highlights
```

> of this release. For more information and registration, visit the event page on the CNCF Online Programs site.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
of this release. For more information and registration, visit the [event page](https://community.cncf.io/events/details/cncf-cncf-online-programs-presents-cloud-native-live-kubernetes-v136-release/) on the CNCF Online Programs site.
```
